\input texinfo    @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename omalloc.hlp

@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment Unix

@majorheading An Overview of @code{omalloc}
@cindex omalloc
@cindex omalloc, overview

This document gives a short overview of @code{omalloc}, the internal
memory manager of @sc{Singular}.

@heading Requirements of a memory manager for @sc{Singular}

Most of @sc{Singular}'s computations boil down to primitive polynomial
operations like copying, deleting, adding, and multiplying of
polynomials. For example, standard bases computations over finite fields
spent (on average) 90 per cent of their time realizing the operation @code{p - m*q} where @code{m} is a monomial, and @code{p,q} are polynomials.

@sc{Singular} uses linked lists of monomials as data structure for
representing polynomials. A monomial is represented by a memory block
which stores a coefficient and an exponent vector. The size of this
memory block varies: its minimum size is three machine words (one word
for each, the pointer to the "next" monomial, the coefficient  and the
exponent vector), it's maximal size is (almost) unlimited, and
we can assume that its average size is 4 to 6 machine words (i.e., the
exponent vector is 2 to 4 words long).

From a low-level point of view, polynomial operations are operations on
linked lists which go as follows:
@enumerate
@item
Do something with the exponent vector (e.g., copy, compare, add), and
possibly do something with the coefficient (e.g., add, multiply, compare
with zero) of a monomial.
@item
Advance to the next monomial and/or allocate a new or free an existing
monomial.
@end enumerate

Assuming that coefficient operations are (inlined) operations on a
single machine word (as they are, for example, for coefficients from
most finite fields), and observing that the exponent vector operations
are linear w.r.t. the length of the exponent vector, we come to the
following major conclusion:

@quotation
@emph{For most computations, a traversal to the next memory block or a
allocation/deallocation of a memory block is, on average, required after
every 4 to 6  machine word operations.}
@end quotation

The major requirements of a memory manager for @sc{Singular} become
immediately clear from this conclusion:

@table @strong
@item (1) allocation/deallocation of (small) memory blocks must be extremely fast
If the allocation/deallocation of a memory blocks requires more than a
couple of machine instructions it would become the bottleneck of the
computations. In particular, even the overhead of a function call
for a memory operation is already too expensive.
@item (2) consecutive memory blocks in linked lists must have a high locality of reference
Compared with the performed operations on list elements, cache misses
(or, even worse, page misses) of memory blocks are extremely expensive:
we estimate that one cache miss of a memory block costs at least ten
or more list element operations. Hence, if the addresses of consecutive
list elements are not physically closed to each other (i.e., if
the linked lists have a low locality of reference), then resolving
cache (or, page) misses would become the bottleneck of computations.
@end table

Furthermore, there a the following more or less obvious requirements on
a memory manager for @sc{Singular}:

@table @strong
@item (3) the size overhead to maintain small blocks of memory must be small
If managing one memory block requires one or more words
(e.g., to store its size) then the total overhead of the
memory manager could sum up to 25% of the overall used memory, which is
an unnacceptable waste of memory.
@item (4) the memory manager must have a clean API and it must support debugging
The API of the memory manager must be similar to the standard API's of
memory managers, otherwise its usability is greatly limited. Furthermore,
it needs to provide error checking and debugging support (to detect
overwriting, twice freed or not-freed memory blocks, etc.) since errors
in the usage of the memory manager are otherwise very hard to find and
correct.
@item (5) the memory manager must be customizable, tunable, extensible and portable
The memory manager should support customizations (like "what to do if no
more memory is available"); its parameters (e.g., allocation policies)
should be tunable, it should be extensible to allow easy
implementations of furthergoing functionality (like overloading of C++
constructors and destructors, etc), and it needs to be portable to all
available operating systems.
@end table

To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no memory manager
available which satisfies these (admittingly in part extreme)
requirements.  Therefore, we desigend and implemented @code{omalloc}.


@heading Principles of omalloc

@code{omalloc} is a stand-alone, general-purpose memory management
library which can be used by any program. Its major design goals were
derived from the memory management requirements of @sc{Singular} (see above).

@code{omalloc} does neither provide nor support garbage collection -- it
is an extension to, and sits on top of, the standard
@code{malloc/realloc/free} routines provided by most operating systems.

@code{omalloc} is specialized in the management of small memory
blocks. The management of large memory blocks, i.e., of memory blocks which
are larger than "one fourth of the page size of the system" (usually
appr. 1KByte) are (almost) left entirely to the underlying
@code{malloc/realloc/free} implementation.


@code{omalloc} manages small blocks of memory on a @strong{per-page
basis}. That is, each used page is split up into a page-header and
equally-sized memory blocks. The page-header has a size of 6 words
(i.e., 24 Byte on a 32 Bit machine), and stores (among others) a pointer
to the free-list and a counter of the used memory blocks of this page.

Pages which manage equally-sized memory blocks are collected into
so-called @strong{"Bins"}, which are (more or less) nothing but linked
lists of pages.

On @strong{memory allocation}, an appropriate page (i.e. one which has a
non-empty free list of the appropriate block size) is determined based
on the  used memory allocation mechanism and its arguments (see
below). The counter of the page is incremented, and the provided memory
block is dequeued from the free-list of the page.

On @strong{memory deallocation}, the address of the memory block is used to
determine the page (header) which manages the memory block to be
freed. The counter of the page is decremented, and the memory block is
enqued into the free-list. If decrementing the counter yields zero,
i.e., if there are no more used memory blocks in this page, then this
page is dequeued from its Bin and put back into a global pool of unused pages.


@code{omalloc}' @strong{API} provides a three-level interface:
@table @asis
@item 1.) Standard function interface level
This level provides the standard allocation/deallocation functions like
@code{malloc, calloc, realloc, free}, etc. No special @code{#include}'s
are required, only linking with @code{libomalloc} is necessary.

@item 2.) Standard macro interface level
This level provides variants of the standard allocation/deallocation
functions and some extensions thereof in form of macros. To use this
level, the header file @code{omalloc.h} needs to be included by an
application, and it must be linked with @code{libomalloc}.

@item 3.) Bin-based macro interface level
This level provides allocation (resp. deallocation) macros whose
arguments are not sizes (like those of the standard allocation
functions/macros), but directly Bins. Naturally, to use this level, the
header the file @code{omalloc.h} needs to be included by an application,
and it must be linked with @code{libomalloc}.
@end table

@code{omalloc} has a special mode of operation, namely its
@strong{debugging mode}. This mode can be activated for the functional
interface by setting run-time parameters, and, for the macro-interface,
by setting debug-flags on a per-file basis, before @code{#include}'ing
the file @code{omalloc.h}.  Furthermore, the granularity of the
debugging can dynamically be set at run-time using various
parameters. One special feature of @code{omalloc} is that memory
allocated with a debugging allocation routine can safely be deallocated
with a non-debugging deallocation routine (and vice versa). In other
words, the debugging and non-debugging mode of omalloc are not mutually
exclusive. When in its debugging mode, @code{omalloc} is set out to
catch more than 20 errors in the usage of its API. And, of course, all
the common and classical errors are among those which are caught by
@code{omalloc}. Error reporting can either be directe3d to log files or to
@code{stderr}. On some platforms, the error reporting does not only
include line number information, but also stack trace (i.e., a
description of the routines on the function stack), information.


@heading Requirement evaluation of @code{omalloc}
After explaining its princples of @code{omalloc} let us evaluate
@code{omalloc} w.r.t. the requirements stated above.

@table @strong

@item (1) efficiency of allocation/deallocation
When used with its Bin-based macro interface level, the
allocation/deallocation of small memory blocks requires (on average)
only a couple (say, 5-10) assembler instructions. We believe
that this is optimal, i.e., as fast as one  possibly could implement
these operations.
@*The other interface levels incur the additional overhead of the
determination of the appropriate Bin (using a table lookup); and, for the
function interface level, the additional overhead of function
calls. Compared with existing memory managers, even these other interface
levels provide unmatchingly efficient allocation/deallocation routines.

@item (2) locality of reference
Based on its design principles @code{omalloc} provides  an
extremely high locality of reference (especially for consecutive elements
of linked-list like structures). To realize this, recall that
@itemize
@item
consecutively allocated memory blocks are physically almost always from
the same memory page (the current memory page of a bin is only changed
when it becomes full or empty).
@item
the probability that consecutively allocated memory blocks are also
physically consecutive (i.e., that their physical addresses are consecutive)
is rather high, since memory pages are spooled-back into the
pool of unused pages as often as possible, and, hence, are reinitialized
as often as possible (notice that allocating from a freshly initialized
page assures that the physical addresses of consecutively allocated
memory blocks are also consecutive).
@end itemize
Moreover, the allocation policy of a Bin can be changed at
run-time such that it is assured that consecutive allocations from this
Bin result in physically consecutive memory blocks. However, the latter
can only be achieved by paying for with a slightly higher memory
consumption, and should therefore only be used temporarily for
long-lived, often traversed-over data.

@item (3) small maintenance size overhead

Since @code{omalloc} manages small memory blocks on a per-page basis, there is
no maintenance-overhead on a per-block basis, but only on a per-page
basis. This overhead amounts to 24 Bytes per memory
page, i.e., we only need 24 Bytes maintenance overhead per 4096 Bytes,
or 0.6%.
@*For larger memory blocks, this overhead grows since there might
be "leftovers" from the division of a memory page into equally-sized
chunks of memory blocks. Furthermore, there is the additional (but
rather small) overhead of keeping Bins and other "global" maintenance
structures.
@*Nevertheless, on average, we observed a maintenance overhead of
appr. 1% of the total memory usage, which, to the best of our knowldege,
is unsurpassed by any existing, general-purpose, memory manager.

@item (4) clean API and debugging support
Whether or not @code{omalloc} provides a clean API is certainly a matter
of taste and expectation. However, it is intrinsic that the price one has to
pay for the speed and flexibiity of a memory manager like @code{omalloc}
is a more complex API than that of the standard
@code{malloc/realloc/free} functions.  Nevertheless, as we believe and
as our experience has shown, the above outlined layered interface
designe provides a practical compromise between simplicity and
efficienc/flexibility.

W.r.t. the debugging mode has our experience shown that it is extremely
useful to be able to fine-tune the granularity of the debugging under both,
a lexical, per-file base scope, and under a dynamic scope set at
run-time. It also turned out that it is very convenient that the
debugging and non-debuggung mode are not mutually exclusive and that the
same library (and, header file) can be used for both modes -- i.e., that
no recompilations of @code{omalloc} are required to enable one or the other
mode. As a summary @code{omalloc} debugging features can at least be
compared with available memory management debugging libraries (like
@uref{http://dmalloc.com/,dmalloc}) -- our experience has furthermore
showh that the features are suitable and appropriate for most practical
purposes. But then again, fittnes is also a matter of taste and
expectations and therefore hard to evaluate.

@item (5) customizable, tunable, extensible and portable

@end table

@heading Performance evaluation of @code{omalloc}

We have no (yet) thoroughly  measured the performance of
@code{omalloc} in comparison to other memory management
systems. Nevertheless, our first experiments yielded the following:
@itemize
@item
@sc{Singular}'s memory consumption is up to 30% lower and its speed is
up to 100% faster when used with @code{omalloc} instead of  of a standard
memory manager (like the one found in the @code{libc} library on Linux, or
the one underlying @code{perl}).

@item
We expect that for programs/computations with similar computational
characteristics like those of @sc{Singular} (e.g., multivariate
polynomial computations, sparse matrix computations, etc), the speed
increase and memory consumption decrease is comparable to those reported
for @sc{Singular}.

@item
For other applications (like @code{perl} or @code{gcc}) we observed a
slight speed increase (depending on the input) and an overall decrease
in the memory consumptions of up to 25%.
@end itemize

@heading Status/Copyright of @code{omalloc}

@code{omalloc} is a fully-functional, mature memory management
library. It still has a TODO list, with more or less only one major
point: Create a detailed technical reference manual (in texinfo),
because there is none so far.

@code{omalloc} was written by
@uref{http://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/~obachman,,Olaf Bachmann} who also
holds its copyright.

@code{omalloc} is @strong{not} free software. Its usage is restricted to
@sc{Singular} and it does @strong{not} fall under @sc{Singular}'s
copyright. If you are interested in using @code{omalloc}, please send
email to @email{obachman@@mathematik.uni-kl.de}. See also the file
COPYING_OMALLOC for details.

@bye

