@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: INSTALL_mac.texi,v 1.2 2002-04-11 16:36:19 mschulze Exp $
@c FILE:    INSTALL_classicMac.texi
@c PURPOSE: Installation instructions for Singular on Macintosh

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@ifclear singularmanual
@majorheading Installation instructions for @sc{Singular} on a (classic) Macintosh


@heading Installation preliminaries

This is the final distribution of @sc{Singular} as MPW tool.
Newer versions of @sc{Singular} will only be available for MacOS X (which is handled like other @sc{Unix}-systems).
To install @sc{Singular} on a Macintosh (PPC only), you need the file @code{Singular-2-0-2-ppc-MPW.sea.hqx} resp. @code{Singular-2-0-2-ppc-MPW.hqx} which you can obtain by public ftp from @uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular}.
Furthermore, you need MacOS version >= 8.5 with an installed MPW shell. 
This version works also without Carbon.

@include register.texi


@heading Installing @sc{Singular} on MacOS X

Please see @uref{INSTALL_unix.html}. 
In contrast to other Unix systems, under MacOS X, @sc{Singular} is only available as a shell command and there is no Emacs interface.
Enter @code{Singular} in a terminal under Aqua to run @sc{Singular}.
Alternatively, you may choose @code{Terminal} as the application to open the file @code{Singular} with and put it into the dock.


@heading Installing Singular

@enumerate

@item
Make sure that you have MPW  installed on your system. 
See below for instructions on how to install MPW and how to avoid conflicts with the @code{Carbon.lib}.

@item
Download the file @code{Singular-2-0-2-ppc-MPW.sea.hqx}.

@item
Expand the downloaded file using a standard Expander (like Compact Pro or StuffIt) to obtain the corresponding self-extracting @code{Singular-2-0-2-ppc-MPW.sea} file.

@item
Click on the self-extracting @code{Singular-2-0-2-ppc-MPW.sea} file. 
This  will create a new folder named @code{Singular:} which contains the @sc{Singular} program in the subfolder @code{2-0-2:ppc-MPW:}. 
Do not change the structure of the subfolders.

@item
Make the folder which contains the executable to the working directory of the MPW shell. 
To start @sc{Singular}, you need to type @code{Singular} in the MPW worksheet. 
Clicking on the @sc{Singular} icon on the desktop, starts up the MPW shell (the working directory of the MPW shell is then the directory of the executable). 
If you start the MPW shell manually, you must set the working directory to the directory of the @sc{Singular} program. 
You may use the directory menu or write into the startup file of the MPW shell the line
@smallexample
setdirectory "{Boot}"Singular:2-0-2:ppc-MPW:
@end smallexample
if @code{"{Boot}"Singular:2-0-2:ppc-MPW:} is the folder of the executable.

After unpacking, you will have a directory structure like:
@table @code
@item Singular:2-0-2:ppc-MPW:Singular
Singular executable
@item Singular:2-0-2:ppc-MPW:libparse
parser for Singular libraries
@item Singular:2-0-2:LIB:
Singular libraries
@item Singular:2-0-2:LIB:gftables:
Singular gftables
@item Singular:2-0-2:doc:singular.idx
index of inline help
@item Singular:2-0-2:doc:singular.hlp
file for inline help
@item Singular:2-0-2:README
information of the distribution
@item Singular:2-0-2:README.hlml
@item Singular:2-0-2:COPYING
licence information
@item Singular:2-0-2:COPYING.html
@item Singular:2-0-2:NEWS
news in the distribution
@item Singular:2-0-2:NEWS.html
@item Singular:2-0-2:INSTALL
instructions like this file
@end table

The @sc{Singular} libraries have a special form to work here. 
Do not use the libraries from other distributions. 
They are not compatible. 
A supplementary file is @code{Singular-2-0-2-html.sea.hqx} which contains the html pages. 
You can use this with a browser but not from the program @sc{Singular}.
The self-extracting archive will create the folder @code{html:} and you may extract it at @code{"@{Boot@}"Singular:2-0-2:}.

@end enumerate


@heading Installing MPW

The final version of MPW is downloadable from Apple at @uref{ftp://ftp.apple.com/developer/Tool_Chest/Core_Mac_OS_Tools/MPW_etc./MPW-GM_Images/}.
Older versions of @code{Carbon.lib} may conflict with the latest MPW. 
In this case, you need to update @code{Carbon.lib} or work without it.


@heading Restrictions

Some typical Unix features of @sc{Singular} are not working with MPW, e.g. links and cooperation with other programs like XEmacs and xterm.

For any other troubles, please send an email to @email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de} and include the header which is displayed by starting up @sc{Singular}
with the @code{-v} option, and a description of your machine and operating system.


@include info.texi

@ifclear singularmanual
Good luck and enjoy! Your @sc{Singular} team.
@end ifclear
