@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: INSTALL_osx.texi,v 1.4 2005-02-23 11:27:39 pohl Exp $
@c FILE:    INSTALL_osx.texi
@c PURPOSE: Installation instructions for Singular on Macintosh

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@ifclear singularmanual
@majorheading Installation instructions for @sc{Singular} on a Macintosh (MacOS X)


@heading Installation preliminaries

To install @sc{Singular} on a Macintosh, you need the file @code{Singular-<version>-ppcMac-darwin.tar.gz} resp. @code{Singular-<version>-share.tar.gz} which you can obtain by public ftp from @uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular}. Furthermore, you need MacOSX version >= 10.2. 

@include register.texi

@heading Installing @sc{Singular} on MacOS X

Please see @uref{INSTALL_unix.html}. Full functionality of @sc{Singular} requires the presence of the X-window
environment. In the absense of X under MacOS X, @sc{Singular} is only available as a shell command, that is
there are no @code{TSingular} and @code{ESingular}. @sc{Singular} can only be used by typing @code{Singular}
in a terminal under Aqua. Alternatively, you may choose @code{Terminal} as the application to open the file @code{Singular} with and put it into the dock. The last step is easier under 10.3 (Panther), because the binaries already
have this property.

@include info.texi

For any troubles, please send an email to @email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de} and include the header which is displayed by starting up @sc{Singular}
with the @code{-v} option, and a description of your machine and operating system.

@ifclear singularmanual
Good luck and enjoy! Your @sc{Singular} team.
@end ifclear
