@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: README_download.texi,v 1.14 2008-12-11 12:47:33 Singular Exp $
@c FILE: README_download.texi
@c PURPOSE: downloading instructions, to be includeded in manual and README_ftp
@c

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@heading To download @sc{Singular} for a Unix platform

Make sure that you have approximately 20 MByte of free disk space and follow
these steps.

@enumerate
@item
You need to download two (archive) files:
@table @code
@item a:
Singular-@value{VERSION}-share.tar.gz 
contains architecture independent data like documentation and libraries
@item b:
Singular-@value{VERSION}-<uname>.tar.gz
contains architecture dependent executables, like the @sc{Singular}
program.
@end table
@code{<uname>} is a description of the processor and operating
system for which @sc{Singular} is compiled. Choose one of the following:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@item @code{ix86-Linux}
@tab PC's running under Linux with a current @code{libc} version.
@item @code{ix86-Win}
@tab PC's running Windows 95/98/NT/2K/XP which have Cygwin version 1.0 (or
higher) already installed. Unless you are familiar with Cygwin, we
recommend that you download one of the self-extracting archives as
described below.
@item @code{SunOS-5}
@tab Sun workstations running Solaris version 5
@item @code{sparc64-Linux}
@tab Sun workstations running Linux in 64bit mode
@item @code{ix86-SunOS}
@tab PC/Opteron workstations running Solaris version 5
@item @code{ppcMac-darwin}
@tab ppc-Macintosh computers running OS X (10.4)
@item @code{ix86Mac-darwin}
@tab ix86-Macintosh computers running OS X (10.5)
@item @code{x86_64-Linux}
@tab Opteron workstations running Linux in 64bit mode
@item @code{IRIX-6}
@tab IRIX workstations running IRIX version 6
@item @code{AIX-4}
@tab AIX workstations running AIX version 4
@end multitable
Please contact us if
you can not find an appropriate architecture dependent archive.

@item
Simply change to the directory in which you wish to install
@sc{Singular} (usually wherever you install 3rd-party software):
@smallexample
cd /usr/local/	
@end smallexample

@sc{Singular} specific subdirectories will be created in such a way
that multiple versions and multiple architecture dependent files
of @sc{Singular} can peaceably coexist under the same @code{/usr/local/}
tree.

@item
Unpack the archives:
@smallexample
gzip -dc Singular-@value{VERSION}-<uname>.tar.gz | tar -pxf -
gzip -dc Singular-@value{VERSION}-share.tar.gz | tar -pxf -
@end smallexample

@item 
After unpacking, see the created file
@code{Singular/@value{VERSION}/INSTALL} (which is also located at
@uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular/INSTALL_unix.html}
for details on how to finish the installation.
@end enumerate

@heading To download @sc{Singular} for Windows 95/98/NT/2K/XP

@enumerate
@item
Download one of the following self-extracting archives:
@table @code
@item @uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular/Singular-@value{VERSION}-Compact.exe,Singular-@value{VERSION}-Compact.exe}
Minimal archive to download. Installs Singular and minimal set of needed
tools/DLLs.
@item @uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular/Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe,Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe}
Typical archive to download. Installs Singular and the XEmacs editor to
run ESingular.
@end table

@item 
Double-click (or, execute), the self-extracting archives, and
@strong{carefully} follow the instructions given there.

@item
In case of problems, see the created file 
@code{etc/INSTALL.txt} (which is also located at
@uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular/INSTALL_win.html}
for details on how to finish the installation.
@end enumerate

@heading To download @sc{Singular} for the Macintosh
We recommend @code{fink} to install @code{Singular} on a Macintosh running 
Mac OsX: it supports currently the follwing versions of OsX:
10.4/intel, 10.4/powerpc, 10.4/powerpc (transitional), 10.3.
If you want to try to intall a binary package, the Unix installation
instructions apply.
(See @uref{http://fink.sf.net})

