@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: README_ftp.texi,v 1.6 2000-01-31 13:05:03 obachman Exp $
@c FILE: README_download.texi
@c PURPOSE: This should reside as README file in the main directory of the
@c          Singular ftp site.

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear


@majorheading Welcome to the Development FTP site of SINGULAR

@sc{Singular} is a Computer Algebra system for polynomial computations
with special emphasize on the needs of commutative algebra, algebraic
geometry, singularity theory and polynomial system solving. For a more
detailed overview of 
@sc{Singular}, see 
@display
@uref{http://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/~zca/Singular/Overview/}
@end display

The new @sc{Singular} version @value{VERSION} which can be downloaded from
this directory is an alpha-release of the upcoming
new release version 2-0 (should be there at the beginning of
2000). 

@macro nref{name,url}
@ifhtml
@item @uref{\url\,,\name\}
@end ifhtml
@ifinfo
@item @code{\name\}
@end ifinfo
@end macro

In this directory you find the following files:
@table @asis
@nref{NEWS, NEWS.html}
news and changes of this version
@nref{COPYING, COPYING.html}
license information for @sc{Singular}
@nref{INSTALL_unix, INSTALL_unix.html}
Unix installation instructions
@item @code{Singular-@value{VERSION}-share.tar.gz}
@sc{Singular} distribution archive which contains architecture
independent data like documentation and libraries.
@item @code{Singular-@value{VERSION}-<uname>}.tar.gz
@sc{Singular} distribution archives which contain architecture dependent
executables, like the @sc{Singular} program.
@end table

Although there are no known bugs, it is to be
expected that the current version @value{VERSION} is not as stable as
the 1.2 version(s), since major changes were done to the @sc{Singular}
kernel. Therefore, it is important to us, that users try out this new
version and tell us what they think about it. Thank you very much in
advance for your support. 

@include README_download.texi



@heading More information about @sc{Singular}: Comments, Questions, Bug Reports

More and up-to-date information about @sc{Singular} is always available
from
@display
@uref{http://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/~zca/Singular}.
@end display
We very much welcome any comments, questions, and bug reports,
especially comments about our new version. Please
contact us at
@display
@email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de}.
@end display

GOOD LUCK and ENJOY!                         
Your @sc{Singular} team.

