@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: README_download.plural.texi,v 1.2 2003-07-31 20:14:28 levandov Exp $
@c FILE: README_download.texi
@c PURPOSE: downloading instructions, to be includeded in manual and README_ftp
@c

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@heading To download @sc{Singular::Plural} for a Unix platform

Make sure that you have approximately 12MByte of free disk space and follow
these steps.

@enumerate
@item
You need to download two (archive) files:
@table @code
@item SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-share.tar.gz 
contains architecture independent data like documentation and libraries
(alternatively, you may also download 
@code{SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-share.zip}).
@item SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-<uname>.tar.gz
contains architecture dependent executables, like the @sc{Singular::Plural}
program.
@end table
@code{<uname>} is a description of the processor and operating
system for which @sc{Singular::Plural} is compiled. Choose one of the following:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@item @code{ix86-Linux}
@tab PC's running under Linux with @code{libc} version 6 (e.g., for SuSe
Linux distribution version >= 6; RedHat Linux distribution version >= 5.2).
@item @code{ix86-Linux-libc5}
@tab PC's running under Linux with @code{libc} version 5 (if you are not 
sure which @code{libc} version you have, run @code{ldd /bin/ls}).
@item @code{ix86-Win}
@tab PC's running Windows 95/98/NT/2K which have Cygwin version 1.0 (or
higher) already installed. Unless you are familiar with Cygwin, we
recommend that you download one of the self-extracting archives as
described below.
@item @code{HPUX-9}
@tab HP workstations running under HPUX version 9
@item @code{HPUX-10}
@tab HP workstations running under HPUX version 10
@item @code{SunOS-5}
@tab Sun workstations running Solaris version 5
@item @code{IRIX-6}
@tab IRIX workstations running IRIX version 6
@item @code{AIX-4}
@tab AIX workstations running AIX version 4
@end multitable
Please contact us if
you can not find an appropriate architecture dependent archive.

@item
Simply change to the directory in which you wish to install
@sc{Singular} (usually wherever you install 3rd-party software):
@smallexample
cd /usr/local/	
@end smallexample

@sc{Singular::Plural} specific subdirectories will be created in such a way
that multiple versions and multiple architecture dependent files
of @sc{Singular::Plural} can peaceably coexist under the same @code{/usr/local/}
tree.

@item
Unpack the archives:
@smallexample
gzip -dc SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-<uname>.tar.gz | tar -pxf -
gzip -dc SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-share.tar.gz | tar -pxf -
@end smallexample
If you have downloaded @code{SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-share.zip},
unpack with 
@smallexample
unzip -u SingularPlural-@value{VERSION}-share.zip
@end smallexample

@item 
After unpacking, see the created file
@code{Plural/@value{VERSION}/INSTALL} (which is also located at
@uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular/non-commutative/Plural/INSTALL_unix.html}
for details on how to finish the installation.
@end enumerate
