@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: README_distribution.texi,v 1.6 2000-06-17 07:55:30 obachman Exp $
@c FILE: README_distribution.texi
@c PURPOSE: general README file to be included in the distribution 
@c

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@majorheading README file for the @sc{Singular} distribution

@sc{Singular} is a Computer Algebra system for polynomial computations
with special emphasize on the needs of commutative algebra, algebraic
geometry, singularity theory and polynomial system solving. For a more
detailed overview of 
@sc{Singular}, see 
@display
@uref{http://www.singular.uni-kl.de/Overview/}
@end display


The current version @value{VERSION} is an alpha-release of the upcoming
new release version 2-0 (should be there at the beginning of
2000). 

Although there are no known bugs, it is to be
expected that the current version @value{VERSION} is not as stable as
the 1.2 version(s), since major changes were done to the @sc{Singular}
kernel. Therefore, it is important to us, that users try out this new
version and report their bugs/comments and suggestions.

Furthermore, the current version is generally not yet as fast as version 
1.2. But this is going to change dramatically in the upcoming release
version(s). 


@macro nref{name,url}
@ifhtml
@item @uref{\url\,,\name\}
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
@item @code{\name\}
@end ifnothtml
@end macro


See the files
@table @asis
@nref{NEWS, NEWS.html}
for news and changes of this version
@nref{COPYING, COPYING.html}
for license information for @sc{Singular}
@nref{INSTALL, INSTALL.html}
for installation instructions, troubleshooting tips, and answers to
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs).
@end table


More and up-to-date information about @sc{Singular} is always available
from
@display
@uref{http://www.singular.uni-kl.de}.
@end display
We very much welcome any comments, questions, and bug reports,
especially comments about our new version. Please
contact us at
@display
@email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de}.
@end display

GOOD LUCK and ENJOY!                         
Your @sc{Singular} team.


